* required project paper *

TITLE

Double Pendulum Simulation
by Vincent Marias
CSCI 261 Section C

PROBLEM DESCRIPTION

Simulation of a simple double pendulum, animated using the SFML multimedia
library. The user defines various parameters related to the simulation via a
configuration file. During the animation, the trajectory of the bottom pendulum
is traced on-screen. The user can press the space key at any time, and the
trajectory that has been traced up to that point will be saved as an image file.

A double pendulum consists of a regular pendulum with another pendulum attached
to the bob of the first. While a single pendulum is very predictable and easy
to model with simple equations, a double pendulum is the complete opposite. A
double pendulum’s trajectory is extremely difficult to predict given initial
conditions, and even the most minute differences in initial conditions will
result in wildly different trajectories. Because of this, a double pendulum is
said to exhibit chaotic motion.

PROGRAM DOCUMENTATION

    To use this program, you need to build SFML on your own machine and include
the paths to your own installation in the CMakeLists.txt file. Before you run
the program, make sure to edit the config.ini file to set up the simulation to
your liking (it's currently set up for my PC). The file includes a description
of the options available to you, and how to choose values for each of them.
Then simply run the program and watch the simulation happen. At any time, if
you like the look of the path traced by the pendulum, press the space bar and
it will save that as an image file in the /output directory (the pendulum
itself will not be included in the image). When you are done, just click the
close button in the corner of the window.

Features wish-list:
- Using proper .ini file parsing (would need to write my own parser, or include
an external library which isn't allowed for this project)
- Dynamically changing the color of the tracing (could use keyboard input, but
would have to add a setTraceColor() function to Pendulums)
- Real-time graphing of various values like velocity, acceleration, etc. (I
think I would do this in a separate SFML RenderWindow, but I'm really not sure
where to even begin with graphing)
- Adding an option for air resistance to make the simulation more realistic
(right now, there are no external forces acting on the pendulum, so I'm pretty
sure it will never stop moving)
- Making the simulation interactive (you could click and drag the masses around
and see what happens in real-time)

TESTS

1. Negative values of all input parameters are handled smoothly. For example,
negative values for the window dimensions will just result in a default of
1920x1080. Or, some others are defined as unsigned variables, so if they're
given a negative number, it just becomes positive. Negative values of G are
fine. Even though it doesn't make any physical sense, if G is negative, it just
uses that because I think the result is cool. (Try it out!)
2. Unrealistic input values for anti-aliasing and circle point counts are not
able to be used. SFML allows for RenderTextures to use anti-aliasing above x16,
but it turns out that (on my machine, at least) this will just break the
program. So entered values above 16 are truncated to 16. SFML also allows you
to attempt to construct circles out of <3 points, but again this just breaks
everything. So entered values below 3 are truncated to 3. (I know that at some
point it's not a circle anymore, especially with 3 points, but it can produce
some cool-looking results so I left it as an option)
3. Resizing the render window during runtime is dealt with dynamically. When
the user resizes a RenderWindow normally, it would just stretch everything. My
program dynamically resizes and moves everything being drawn so that resizing
the window during runtime is a real option for the user.
4. In the config.ini file, users can enter values in any order they want, or
leave values out entirely if they want. Any value not found in the file will be
set to a default. For example, if there is no user-defined option for a
framerate limit, the program will just use 60 as this will be fine on most
computers.
5. If the user includes an entry in the config.ini file, but uses the wrong
format and omits the '=', then my program used to crash. I added error checking
every time the program asks for data from the file, to make sure that there is
in fact a '=' present before it starts trying to parse the string. That way,
instead of crashing, it just replaces those misformatted lines with default
values.

REFLECTIONS

    I learned a lot more from this project than I expected to. The most impactful
lesson was about the importance of careful planning and design. Before I wrote
any code, I should have sat down and written out exactly how I wanted
everything to function and how different classes and functions would interface.
Sort of like storyboarding a movie or something like that. I would have ended
up with a much better-designed program that would also likely be more concise
and make more sense to other people. Even with all the comments I left, I get
the feeling my code is still confusing.
    Another lesson was about time-management. This kind of goes along with
planning, but if I had started work on this project just a few days earlier, I
would have had time to implement most of the features I didn't get around to
and would have ended up with a better program in the end. Of course, having
more time would have also made the project less stressful over all.
    Finally, I learned a lesson about reading the instructions carefully and
completely before diving into a project like this. I missed the part that says
we cannot use ANY external code other than what we've used in the class so far.
Without having read that, I assumed that since we were already using the SFML
library, I could use another external library in my program. I got about
halfway through implementing my use of that library before realizing I probably
wasn't allowed to do so.